+++
title = "Learning and building"
author = "Seth Etter"
date = 2018-03-13
+++

This post will serve as a reminder to myself, but hopefully also as useful
advice to others out there.

I spend a rather inordinate amount of time worrying about how to best spend my
free time (counter-intuitive, I know). My thinking has recently gone one level
out on this dilemma. I've noticed the different things I'm considering spending
my time doing generally fall into two categories -- *learning* and *building*.

As an engineer I recognize that both are important. If I want to build things, I
have to learn how to build them, so I can't build without learning first. But I
can, however, just learn forever and build nothing. But is that a life worth
living? Of course not. I've directly experienced the joy in _actually_ creating
something. Even more so when I see someone (or, even better, several people)
using the thing that I built.

The problem I run into is, again, as an engineer, I want to make sure I'm
building the thing in the best possible way. I want to learn as much as I can to
enable my ability to build to it's fullest potential. I hear about all sorts of
different tools, languages, techniques, etc, and I tell myself..

> Once I'm fluent with language X and tools Y and Z, not only will I be able to
> build like nobody's business, but those things will be built well, and I'll
> enjoy the process!"

Even as I'm typing this out I see the fallacy in it. It's a trap. It's doubt
playing on my mind that what I know now _isn't enough_. Or even if it _is_
enough, it's not enough _for me_. I want to do things _better_. I want to find
the _perfect_ tools, the _perfect_ techniques, and have the _perfect_ process.

This perfectionism can be crippling, but it's also a quality that makes a good
engineer! Wanting things to always be better and to find ways to make that
happen is what engineers are supposed to do (right?). So it seems that stifling
that quality means I'm holding back my capabilities (right?).

This is a paradox, of course. If this constant perfectionism and doubt about my
current abilities and familiar tools keeps me from _ever_ building something,
then it's all for naught, and that's no fun.

As with most paradoxes, there is an ambiguous balance that must be found between
the two sides of the argument. At what point do I settle with what I know, what
I'm using, and just build something, being perfectly okay with the fact that
it's not perfect (or even _close_ to perfect)? Settle feels like a dirty word.
But there has to be a point, right?

In reality, there's no reason you can't embrace both of these things -- learning
and building. There just has to be a balance between them. Currently, I think
I'm a little out of balance, being heavy on the learning side. It should go
without saying, but learning all there is to know in the world does little good
for anyone if that knowledge isn't _applied_.

It's important to take breaks on your journey for knowledge to actually create
something. Find out what that knowledge can do for others when you put it out
into the world. See how it enables you to do some good, and use that information
to further inform your efforts.

I'll go ahead and make an assumption that most people want to create things
and put them out into the world. Whether those things are posts on social media,
or pieces of artwork, or software, or ideas in the form of blog post, or
scientific studies and research, these are all things that humans make and put
out into the world to hopefully have some sort of (preferably positive) impact.

If you think this assumption is true for you, try to keep it in mind with all
your efforts. When you're learning, think about how _what_ you're learning will
contribute to the goal of creating whatever it is you want to create.

And, most importantly, make sure you take time to actually create something.
Learning is rewarding, of course, but using that knowledge to put something out
into the world is even more rewarding.
