---
collection: posts
layout: post.html
title: Bridging Wichita's communities
url: bridging-wichitas-communities
date: 2015-12-29
---

It's been said on numerous occasions that there are too many uncoordinated
efforts in Wichita. That we have several community leaders working to create
change and improve the city but that efforts are being duplicated. "We need to
coordinate and collaborate" is what is often said, but the question remains:

### How, exactly?

Recently I was part of a meeting with several individuals involved in various
community focused organizations here in town. The subject of the meeting was
"what is everyone doing and how can we collaborate". Overall I call it a
productive meeting. I met individuals I had not known before and learned about
organizations and efforts that exist here.

However, it was far from obvious how we proceed with the set mission for that
meeting. We settled on making sure we share contact information and
organizational involvement, mostly so if an opportunity for two organizations to
collaborate presents itself, we have the means to do so. I think this was a
valid way to conclude the meeting.

It seemed to me that there was some desire to create some kind of giant
coordinated effort between all organizations represented at the meeting. **I
have no idea how that would have been possible**. Given that, simply creating
more awareness seemed like a productive conclusion.

### But..

I brought up briefly at the meeting that having a way to spread the word about
the different efforts in Wichita to our own organization's members would be a
great way to encourage cross-involvement within our memberships.

*How do we go about that?*

There's a number of ways that would be effective. One, however, struck me today.

**What if there was a generalized event that individuals from every one of these
various diverse organizations had a place in? An event where any one of these
people had a voice to share their ideas?**

This would allow members from any walks of life and background and interest in
Wichita to attend the same meeting, hear from each other, and share their
passions, interests, ideas, etc. It would increase awareness, create collisions,
and boost efforts. Overall, it'd be incredibly valuable.

A good friend of mine, Kevin Falting, was recently inspired by the [Ignite
Boulder](ignite-boulder) speaking event. At this event, any person can get up
and give a 5 minute talk on a subject or idea of their choice. **It must be an
idea, not just promotion. Teach, don't preach is the motto.** But, it is
inclusive to anyone wanting to spread an idea, and it's been an incredible part
of the Boulder community.

### Let's do it here!

Kevin decided to take the reins and make this happen for Wichita. So he created
[Wichitalks](http://wichitalks.com). I think this event has a ton of potential
to bolster our community and spread ideas and efforts to places and people we
haven't yet thought of.

If nothing else, it's going to be very entertaining. The talks are meant to be
educational, inspirational, motivating, inspiring and entertaining. **It's open
to anyone who wants to share their thoughts or ideas.** I encourage you to
attend, and if you feel so inclined, to speak.

**The first occurrence will be on Jan 29, 2015, 6:30p at The Labor Party in Old
Town. Come check it out.**

[Check out the website](http://wichitalks.com) for more information or to sign
up as a speaker. This is definitely an event worth attending.


[ignite-boulder]: http://igniteboulder.com/
